Migration guide for #10 (#84)
haskell/core-libraries-committee: guides/functor-combinator-instances-and-class1s.md

# What

> CLC has approved the [proposal #10](https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/10), to relax instances for Functor combinators and put superclasses on \<class>1 and \<class2> to make the change less-breaking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CLC has approved the [proposal #10](https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/10), to relax instances for Functor combinators and put superclasses on \<class>1 and \<class>2 to make the change less-breaking.
```

> The effected classes are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The affected classes are:
```

- `Eq1`, `Eq2`
- `Ord1`, `Ord2`
- `Show1`, `Show2`
- `Read1`, `Read2`

Before, e.g.:
```haskell
instance (Eq1 f, Eq1 g, Eq a) => Eq (Compose f g a)

class Eq1 f

class Eq2 f
```

After, e.g.:
```haskell
instance Eq (f (g a)) => Eq (Compose f g a)

class (forall a. Eq a => Eq (f a)) => Eq1 f

class (forall a. Eq a => Eq1 (f a)) => Eq2 f
```

# When

At the very earliest, the change may appear in GHC 9.6 (~ Q1 2023).

# How

This is a breaking change:

> 1. People can no longer define e.g. `Eq1` without `Eq`, or `Eq2` without `Eq1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. People can no longer define e.g. `Eq1` without `Eq`, or `Eq2` without `Eq1`.
```

# What

> CLC has approved the [proposal #10](https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/10), to relax instances for Functor combinators and put superclasses on \<class>1 to make the change less-breaking.

Reviewer 2: Please put an explicit list of classes affected.

Author: Done

Before, e.g.:
```haskell
instance (Eq1 f, Eq1 g, Eq a) => Eq (Compose f g a)

class Eq1 f

class Eq2 f
```

After, e.g.:
```haskell
instance Eq (f (g a)) => Eq (Compose f g a)

class (forall a. Eq a => Eq (f a)) => Eq1 f

class (forall a. Eq a => Eq1 (f a)) => Eq2 f
```

# When

At the very earliest, the change may appear in GHC 9.6 (~ Q1 2023).

# How

This is a breaking change:

> 1. People could define e.g. `Eq1` without `Eq`, or `Eq2` without `Eq1`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. People can no longer define e.g. `Eq1` without `Eq`, or `Eq2` without `Eq1`
```

> 2. People could write complicated instances on various abstract machinary that doesn't abide by the new superclasses.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. People can no longer write complicated instances on various abstract machinery that doesn't abide by the new superclasses.
```

However, the breakage is of limited scope.
An impact analysis (please see [comments following here](https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/10#issuecomment-1166669613))

> showed that a only handle of packages that sucessfully pass dependency resolution on Stackage `nightly-2022-06-17` break with this change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
showed that only a few of the packages that sucessfully pass dependency resolution on Stackage `nightly-2022-06-17` break with this change.
```

Patches have been submitted to each of them.

> The migration policy for this change is backward-compatible: you can migrate already and still retain compatibility with existing GHCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration policy for this change is backwards-compatible: you can migrate already and still retain compatibility with existing GHCs.
```

Because of this, CLC suggests applying patches at your earliest convenience.

> 1. Add any missing instances

Reviewer 2: Let's spell this out more explicitly "If you defined `instance Eq1 f` but omitted `instance Eq a => Eq (f a)`, you must now define the latter, e. g., as `(==) = eq1`. If you defined `instance Eq2` f ..."

Please also link relevant PRs from https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/10#issuecomment-1166669613 as examples.

2. Sadly there is no exact pattern for this, but here are two examples:

   - https://github.com/haskell-streaming/streaming/pull/113
   - https://github.com/RyanGlScott/text-show/pull/57

   As one can see, this comes from rather fancy stuff.

   `streaming` could be simpler, as the pre-existing comment points out, by just requiring a `Show1 f` constraint.
   The other instance that required such a constraint did not need any migration.

   `text-show` had `*1` instances that also converted between `String`- and `Text`-based showing.
   This violates the superclass.
   The instance must instead "pass through" `String`-based shows to `String`-based shows.

> Note what is *not* a breaking change is the changing of the instances for `Compose` etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that changing the instances for `Compose` etc. is *not* a breaking change.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Note that in contrast to the above, the other half of proposal 10 are *not* breaking changes.
In conjunction with the changes to the classes, the changes to instances for `Compose` and other such data types is backwards compatible..
```

Thanks to the new superclasses, the old instance constraints imply the new instance constraints, so existing generic code using those types will continue to work.

> `Compose` and friends are much more common than the `*1` and `*2` classes, so this yields far less breakage over all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Compose` and friends are much more common than the `*1` and `*2` classes, so this yields far less breakage overall.
```
